# Amazon-Deforestration-Prediction
The aim of this project is to predict the area of deforestation in the Amazonian rainforest using different machine learning approaches. The Amazon rainforest, which stores around 76 billion tons of carbon and 20 billion tons of water, plays a vital role in regulating our climate and water cycle. As of 2023, about 20% of the Amazon rainforest has been deforested. Accurate deforestation forecasting allows for preventative measures on a governmental and corporate level. Our goal is to understand the trend of deforestation, create a model that can predict the area of deforestation using historical data, and analyze other factors that may contribute to deforestation.

## Data
The historical data comes from TerraBrasilis, a web portal used to query spatial data from governmental environment organizations, detailing the amount of deforestation in kilometers for each of Brazil’s states and municipalities from 2007 to 2022. There are 412 different municipalities belonging to 8 states in the dataset. For simplicity purposes in EDA, we started to examine the deforestation data for one state, using the average area of deforestation for all municipalities per year. In our EDA and analysis, we used the state Acre. After the initial EDA we expanded the dataset by adding more features. Instead of the cumulative deforestation, we computed the deforestation increment as our target variable. This left us with observations from 2008 to 2022, since we had to leave out observations related to 2007. From the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics, we collected gdp and gdp per capita information for the areas in our datasets from 2008 to 2020. We observed that the gdp and gdp per capita follow a monotone, increasing trend. Taking that into consideration, we imputed the values for 2021 and 2022 using a linear regression model trained for each municipality individually.

## Modeling Approach
1. Time Series Forecasting: The time series forecasting task involves fitting models on historical data to predict future time steps. The accuracy of our predictions will entirely depend on how well our model fits the data. To accomplish this, we used the popular statistical model Autoregressive Integrated Moving Average (ARIMA).
2. Ensemble Stacking: In the ensemble stacking modeling approach we treated deforestation as a regression problem instead of time series. To achieve this, we trained multiple regression models as our base layer and stacked an OLS on top of it to predict the final deforestation increment(areakm). We split the dataset into three different parts. The observations of the last three years of 2020,2021 and 2022 were separated as the holdout set, and this hold out set will be used to validate the final output of the stack model. From the remaining data, the observations of the last three years 2017,2018 and 2019 we separated as the meta set to validate the first layer of models, and the remaining data will be used as the base set to run the grid search.
3. Multistate Model: Another minor approach taken was using an ensemble method, both with raw and normalized data. The year and GDP of the states were the data columns used to predict the area increment of deforestation. This ensemble method initially started as a multistate method. Using a gradient boosted model, an xgradient boosted model, and a random forest regression, the average prediction was taken after being fit on the raw/normalized data from each state. This created a dictionary of models that would be tailored to each states individual data. <br>
<b> NOTE: I recommend taking a look at the section 3 and 4 of "Final paper" to get a detail view of the approaches and the outcomes. </b>

## Conclusion
With the models we’ve provided, there is substantial evidence that shows we can use both the original forest area data to predict the future of the Amazon, and also use the
economic data to assist or entirely predict the rainforest’s future condition. Some future ideas for these models include creating fake data to represent some of the past years where the rainforest was not being supervised as heavily, comparing models that use economic data to models that do not use it, and finally finding other economic factors that correspond to the Amazon’s condition. The biggest weakness to our project so far has been the lack of data, since we are only using yearly data that translates to either a lot of disjointed sparse data, or a mass accumulation of spare data. we believe the best solution to this is to use augmented data created by trained models such as these to create highly accurate representations of what monthly data for the past half century should look like.
